Making comparisons

Lets's say that your car is fast. If you're comparing your car to someone else's, you could say that it's as fast, faster, or the fastest. 

'Fast' is the basic word, and is called the positive form. 'As fast' tells us that it moves at the same speed as the other car. 'As fast' is called the equative form. 'Faster' tells us that the first car moves more quickly than the second car, but that there are other cars which might move quicker still. 'Faster' is called the comparative form. 'Fastest' tells us that no other cars can move more quickly than this car. 'Fasest' and is called the superlative form. 

Short adjectives
In Welsh as in English, when you have a short adjective of one or two syllable, you can create these forms by adding a suffix to the stem of the positive form:

positive	fast 		cyflym
equative	as fast 	add -ed 	cyflymed
comparative	faster 	add -ach 	cyflymach
superlative	fastest 	add -af 	cyflymaf (sometimes the f is dropped)

When the positive form ends in -b, -d, -g, -dl, -dn, -dr, -gr these change to -p, -t, -c, -tl, tn, -tr, -cr before the suffix is added. Sometimes, internal vowels change - w and aw become y and o - and sometimes -n and -r are doubled. There are other irregularities, but you will learn these exceptions as you go along. 

The equative form is often used with 'cyn' preceeding it, which causes soft mutation (not of rh or ll), e.g. cyn wynned, as white.

Here are some examples of of adjectives and their different forms: 

	positive	equative	comparative	superlative 
obvious/clear	amlwg	amlyced	amlycach	amlycaf 
fragile	brau	breued	breuach	breuaf 
dirty (N)	budr	butred	butrach	butraf 
short	byr	byrred	byrrach	byrraf 
kind	caredig	carediced	caredicach	caredicaf 
nasty	cas	cased	casach	casaf 
round	crwn	cryned	crynach	crynaf 
strong	cryf	cryfed	cryfach	cryfaf 
lazy	diog	dioced	diocach	diocaf 
clean	glân	glaned	glanach	glanaf 
powerful	grymus	grymused	grymusach	grymusaf 
wet	gwlyb	gwlyped	gwlypach	gwlypaf 
tenacious	gwydn	gwytned	gwytnach	gwytnaf 
white	gwyn	gwynned	gwynnach	gwynnaf 
nice, pleasant	hyfryd	hyfryted	hyfrytach	hyfrytaf 
full	llawn	llawned	llawnach	llawnaf 
sweet	melys	melysed	melysach	melysaf 
pure	pur	pured	purach	puraf 
important	pwysig	pwysiced	pwysicach	pwysicaf 
cheap	rhad	rhated	rhatach	rhataf 
likely	tebyg	tebyced	tebycach	tebycaf 
fair	teg	teced	tecach	tecaf 
poor	tlawd	tloted	tlotach	tlotaf 
pretty	tlws	tlysed	tlysach	tlysaf 
heavy	trwm	trymed	trymach	trymaf 
light (in weight)	ysgafn	ysgafned	ysgafnach	ysgafnaf

Some borrowings add -ied, -iach, -iaf, especially in the North: e.g. braf, brafied, brafiach, brafiaf also neis, ffres, cwl, crand, nobl.

Of course, some adjectives are irregular: 

	positive	equative	comparative	superlative 
near, close	agos	nesed	nes	nesaf 
	agos(less correctly:	agosed	agosach	agosaf)
difficult	anodd	anhawsed	anos	anhawsaf 
	anodd (less correctly:	anodded	anoddach	anoddaf) 
small, little	bach, bychan	lleied (occ: bychaned)	Ilai	lleiaf 
soon	buan	buaned	buanach	buanaf 
early	cynnar	cynted	cynt	cyntaf 
good	da	cystal	gwell	gorau
bad	drwg	cynddrwg	gwaeth	gwaethaf 
	drwg occ: (in sense of naughty)	dryced	drycach	drycaf
valuable	gwerthfawr	gwerthfawroced	gwerthfawrocach	gwerthfawrocaf
easy	hawdd	hawsed	haws	hawsaf 
	hawdd (less correctly:	hawdded	hawddach	hawddaf)
old	hen	hyned	hy+n (less correctly: hynach)	hynaf 
long	hir	cyhyd	hwy	hwyaf 
	hir (less correctly:	hired	hirach	hiraf) 
young	ieuanc	ieuanged	iau/ieuangach	ieuaf/ieuangaf 
young	ifanc	ifenged/ifanged	ifengach	ifengaf 
low	isel	ised	is	isaf 
wide	llydan	lleted/cyfled	lletach	lletaf 
big	mawr	cymaint	mwy	mwyaf 
high	uchel	uched/cyfuwch	uwch	uchaf 


Long adjectives
Where you have adjectives of two or more syllables, these are used with the different forms of 'more', (mor, mwy, mwyaf), instead of using endings. Mor is followed by soft mutation, but does not affect rh and ll. 

Note that those irregular adjectives in the table above cannot be used with 'mwy'. Also, adjectives of exactly two syllables can use either method.

Here are some examples:


brotherly	brawdol 	mor frawdol 	mwy brawdol 	mwyaf brawdol
stubborn	cyndyn 	mor gyndyn 	mwy cyndyn 	mwyaf cyndyn 
disgraceful	gwarthus 	mor warthus 	mwy gwarthus 	mwyaf gwarthus
cowardly	llwfr 	mor llwfr 	mwy llwfr 	mwyaf llwfr 
reasonable	rhesymol 	mor rhesymol 	mwy rhesymol 	mwyaf rhesymol


As big as a house...
To say that something is 'as... as...', use the equative plus â: 'cyn... -ed â...' when you have a short adjective that uses the endings, or 'mor... â' when you have a long adjective which uses the forms of 'mwy'. 

Some examples: 

as heavy as 	cyn trwmed â
as happy as	cyn hapused â
as beautiful as	cyn hardded â

as funny as 	mor doniol â
as comfortable as 	mor cyfforddus â
as interesting as	mor diddorol â

Remember that â causes aspirate mutation to the word that follows, and changes to ag when a vowel follows.

Faster than a speeding bullet...
To say that something is '-er than', use the comparative plus na: '-ach na ...' or 'mwy... na ...'.

weaker than 	gwannach na
faster than 	cyflymach na
cheaper than	rhatach na

more anxious than 	 mwy pryderus na
more disgraceful than	mwy gwarthus na
more reasonable than 	mwy rhesymol na

Remember that na causes aspirate mutation to the words that follows, and changes to nag when a vowel follows.

The quickest fox...
When using the superlative, and saying that something is 'the -est', you have to use the identification sentence structure which puts 'bod' towards the end. When you say that this mountain is the highest, you have to say 'y mynydd 'ma ydy'r uchaf. You must not use mae with a superlative. 






