useful phrases - swearing

We all did it at school, huddled round dictionaries in the playground or before interminable French or German lessons started, looking up naughty words like 'willy' or 'fanny'. Well, now CMC saves you the effort of searching for swearwords, profanities, scatological phrases and words that your gran would frown upon by gathering together a selection for your delectation. And don't tell me you're not curious... 

Note: If you are of a sensitive disposition, please do not read on. And certainly don't email me telling me that Welsh is a 'pure' language or the language of heaven and therefore should not be sullied by such profanities. If you can show me a Welsh speaking adult who doesn't fuck in Welsh, then I'll show you someone who needs to get out more.

Source: All these phrases were collected from members of the CMC email list or visitors to CMC so may reflect local dialects. If you have any swearwords that you would like to add to this collection, please do email them to us. 

Abbreviations: 
v - verb
n - noun
npl -plural noun
a - adjective
vp - verb phrase (e.g. 'shitting bricks')
np - noun phrase (e.g. 'damp squib')
i - idiomatic phrase

word/phrase	meaning
biji-bo (n)	penis
bogal jobio (v)	to have gay sex
bustachu (v) 	a bustach is a castrated bull so to bustachu is to have sex without danger of impregnating your partner
bwchio (v)	to fuck
cachgi (n)	lit. shit-dog = coward 
cachiad (n) 	shit
cachu (v) 	to shit
cachu iar 	chicken shit
cachu planciau (vp)	lit. shitting planks = to be terrified 
cael cachiad (vp)	to have a shit
calar (n)	penis/cock (from the Mabinogion)
cedor (n)	pubic hair
ceilliau (npl) 	testicles
cer i grafu (i)	lit. go to scratch = go to hell
cerpyn jam (np)	tampon (from Wrecsam)
cetors (npl) 	pubic hairs
cig a llysiau (i)	lit. meat and two veg = male genitals 
cnych (n) 	fuck
cnychu (v)	to fuck
codiad (n) 	erection
cont (n)	cunt (but in Caernarfon "iawn cont" is considered a warm greeting)
corris (n)	cunt
cryniadur (n) 	vibrator (not to be confused with Crynwr - Quaker)
cwd (n)	scrotum (also in Caernarfon, "S'mae cwd" is a greeting)
dim gwerth rhech dafad (i)	lit. not worth a sheep's fart = worthless
disgleirio/sgleinio fel ceilliau ci (i)	lit. to shine like a dog's testicles = the dog's bollocks
dos i chwarae efo dy nain (i)	go play with your granny = fuck off
fel rhech jet (i)	lit. like a jet's fart = like a damp squib
ffwrch (n)	fuck, or can refer to a vagina
ffwrcho (v) 	to fuck
ffyc (n)	fuck
ffycio (v) 	to fuck
haliad hallt (n) 	salty wank
jini ffernac (n) 	tampon
lembo (n)	idiot
llawes goch (np)	lit. red sleeve = woman's genitalia
mae hi wedi cachi arna i (i)	lit. it's shit on me = I'm buggered/I'm for the chop
malu cachu (vp)	lit. mincing shit = talking nonsense
mewn cachiad (i)	lit. in a shit = to do something more quickly than something done 'mewn dau gachiad'
mewn cachiad chwanan (i)	lit. in a flea's shit = to do something more quickly than something done 'mewn cachiad'
mewn cachiad nico (i)	lit. in a goldfinches shit = to do something quickly
mewn dau gachiad (i)	lit. in two shits = to do something quickly
min dwr (np) 	lit. watery hard on = an erection you get when you're very drunk
paid â chodi pais wedi pisio (i)	lit. don't lift your petticoats after you've pissed = don't cry over split milk
pen pidlan gawsog (i)	lit. cheesy head of a penis = cheesy nob end
pen-coc (n)	dick head
pidin tarw (np)	lit. a bull's penis = dickhead
pis (n)	piss 
pisio (v)	to piss 
pisio bwrw (np) 	lit. pissing rain = heavy rain
pisio cath (np)	lit. cat piss = French currant bush (plant)
pisio glaw (np)	lit. pissing rain = heavy rain
piso (v)	to piss 
piso dryw (np)	lit. wren's piss = a weak drink (e.g. tea)
piso dryw bach yn y môr (i)	lit. wren's piss in the sea = a drop in the ocean
piso gwidw (np)	lit. widow's piss = a weak drink (e.g. tea)
putain (n)	prostitute
putainfeistr (n)	pimp
pwdin blew (np)	lit. hairy pudding = female genitalia
rhech mewn potel, rhech mewn potel bop (i)	lit. fart in a bottle, fart in a bottle of pop = insignificant thing or action, like 'fart in a jacuzzi'.
rhyw (n) 	sex
rhywiol (a)	sexual
sach/au bach (n)	condoms (from Merthyr)
saim serch (n) 	lit. love grease = love juice
sguthan (n)	harridan, bitch
shinach (n)	sly bastard
siani (n)	female genitalia
silffo (v)	to get off with someone
sioncen (n)	fanny
slebog (n)	slag, loose woman
spwng dorth (np)	lit. spunk loaf = Arctic roll (spongecake with ice-cream inside) 
swydd chwythiant (np)	blow job
tafod bach (n)	G-spot
twll dy din (vp)	bugger off
twll tin (n)	arsehole
y cachwr (np)	lit. the shitter = shithead
y cedor lama (np)	lit. the llama's pubic hair = wanker 
y coc oen (np)	lit. the lamb's cock = dickhead
yn twll tin Ifan saer (i)	lit. in Ifan the carpenter's arse = sarcastic response to the question 'Where is it?'


